

--- START OF Report_1_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---
Report 1: Project Progress
University/Department: California State University, Dominguez Hills
Course/Thesis/Project Title: CSC 599 Project
Semester/Year: Fall 2025
Project Title: A Hyper-Personalized Financial Product Engine Using Generative AI
Student Name: Sumaiya Shaikh
Student ID: 213028116
Instructor / Committee Chair: Dr. Benyamin Ahmadnia
Date: 10-27-2025
1. Abstract / Summary of Progress
This report is intended to share progress on the “Hyper-Personalized Financial Product
Engine” project and to mark the completion of the “Foundation & Data” workstream (Weeks
1– 2). This deliverable represents the phase of the project moving from the descriptive
design and analysis to a functional baseline implementation. The design for the triadic (3
tier) system architecture, which centers on a Flask backend and React frontend, has been
successfully carried out. The database schema (User, Transaction, ProductCatalog) has been
transformed into implemented code using Flask-SQLAlchemy. Additionally, basic user
authentication (registering, logging in and password hashing) is fully functional. A synthetic
dataset (1,000 users and 1,000,000 transactions) has been generated with the Faker library
and populated in the SQLite database to set them up for modeling training. All foundational
workstream goals have been completed for this iteration, the project is on schedule, and the
project moves to model building (Weeks 3–6).
2. Introduction and Objectives (Recap)
This project seeks to address a key problem in the modern FinTech environment. In this
section we present a summary of the project’s problem, motivation, goals, and key ideas as
they relate to the problem area.
2.1. Problem Statement
The primary problem being certainly a breakdown in ability to not just communicate but
also fulfill matching individuals with highly relevant and contextual financial products in a
safe digital environment. The digitalization of banking has not clarified choices; in fact, it
has confused consumers and resulted in “decision paralysis” which dramatically decreases
engagement. Current environments are fragmented and contain a fundamental issue that
exists:
• Prediction without Explanation: Traditional recommendation systems claim to be
proficient in predicting the product a user well like (i.e., collaborative filtering), but
do not provide an explanation that is personalized, relevant, and trustworthy in
relation to the individual.
• Explanation without Context: In contrast, a modern “AI chatbot” may be able to
explain complex financial concepts, but lacks deep personalized contextual detail. It
is simply not aware of a user’s transaction history, financial goals, nor their risk
appetites as historical data, and subsequently produces generic, impersonal advice.
As a result, there is low customer engagement, low financial literacy and a significant loss of
opportunity for both consumers as individuals and financial institutions.
2.2 Motivation and Scope
The project goals motivate the development of a single unified structure to fill the gap of a
"trustworthy financial assistant" that securely ingests and utilizes granular financial data to
give back to users. This system will merge prediction (the Recommender System) with
explanation (Generative AI) into one process that users can access in a conversational
manner.
• Scope: The scope of the project is to deliver a complete, end-to-end, technical proof-
of-concept. This proof-of-concept will involve a secure user authentication and
management system, a backend data architecture, a working predictive
recommender model, and a conversational generative AI interface. The deliverable
will be a web application, which is a full stack application that demonstrates this
functionality of integration.
• Limitations: The recommender model will be trained only with the synthetic
financial transaction data generated for this project. The generative AI will leverage
the product catalog and user recommendations, but will not be producing real-time
market advice or executing trades.
2.3. Project Objectives
There are six primary objectives for the project established in Report 0:
1. System Design: Plan an end-to-end system topology for the web-based system
(Completed).
2. Data Synthesis and Analysis: Create a realistic synthetic dataset of user financial
behavior and products (Completed during this Period).
3. Model Building: Construct and train a machine-learning recommender model to
recommend products by matching user profiles (Next Phase).
4. AI Application: Create an Generative AI model (RAG) to support conversational
explanations and financial planning applications (Planned).
5. Interface Development: Toward building a complete fully functioning full-stack web
application for users interaction (Planned).
6. Evaluation: Evaluate the overall system performance by reviewing model metrics,
conversation quality, and systematic reviews (Planned).
2.4. Foundational Concepts and Literature Review:
Two main foundations of machine learning have underpinned the project's design and are
briefly discussed here.
• Pillar 1: Recommender Systems: The "Prediction" Engine
Recommender systems in finance have progressed from basic content-based filtering to
more potent collaborative filtering (CF) models (5). The most advanced CF techniques
frequently leverage Matrix Factorization (MF) (3). A typical strength of MF techniques is
managing the sparse nature associated with many financial applications (a user engages
only with a small number of the thousands of potential products offered). The premise is to
decompose the large, sparse user-item interaction matrix into lower dimensional "latent
factor" matrices. The latent factors represent missing attributes such as a user's "long-term
growth" or a product's "low risk." By inferring these latent factors, the model can predict
the underlying utility a user would place on unengaged items.
One of the major issues to solve in this domain is the “cold start” problem: a new user has
no transaction history and a new product has no interaction data. To address this issue, this
project will adopt a Hybrid Recommender System (2) approach where the recommender
system will primarily rely on content-based filtering (explicit user data like income_level
and risk_tolerance will be used in generating baseline recommendations) in the early stages
with a user with no transaction history and will later shift to a model that incorporates the
more robust outcome from Matrix Factorization as the user builds transaction history.
• Pillar 2: Generative AI (The “Explanation” Engine)
The second pillar is Generative AI (in particular, the use of Large Language Models, LLM). It
is important to understand that modern LLMs originated from the Transformer concept
(11) and a self-attention mechanism. A self-attention mechanism is a means for the model
to indicate how much importance it needs to give to certain words in a sentence in
determining context. This has particular relevance for finance where the contextual
meaning of “risk” or “return” relies heavily on the dialogue occurring around it.
LLMs can, however, “hallucinate” or fabricate facts. This is completely unacceptable in
regard to finance. To provide accurate, credible, and personalized recommendations, this
project will utilize the approach of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (4). RAG is a
method that grounds the LLM in a trustworthy and specific knowledge base. In practice, if a
user asks a question like, "Why did you recommend this loan?" the RAG will invoke the
following three actions:
1. Retrieve: load in the user's profile, the recommender system's output (the
match_score, for instance, "match_score: 0.95"), and the description of the
ProductCatalog for that specific loan.
2. Augment: load that content to the LLM along with the user's question, which is
providing the context (the context is retrieved data),
3. Generate: instruct the LLM to generate an answer using only the context. This
provides an explanation that is personalized (i.e., "this loan was recommended
because it has a low-interest rate, given your data, which was posted it your low-
risk profile...") and accurate.
3. Work Completed
This section describes the specific tasks performed during the "Foundation & Data" phase
(Weeks 1-2). This work has a successful completion of the conceptual designs identified in
Report 0 into a functional, tangible application skeleton, following the compressed
development plan identified by the Professor.
3.1. System Architecture and Tech Stack Setup
The core three-tier system architecture was executed, which included setting up the
environments and project structures for each layer.
• Application Layer (Backend)
o Framework: Flask (Python) was selected as the backend framework, using
the Application
o Pattern (create_app()). This is a particularly important design choice for
scalability. Rather than defining a single global Flask app, the app is
constructed by a function. This allows:
1) Easy Configuration: The factory function can be passed a
configuration (e.g., DevelopmentConfig, TestingConfig), allowing the
app to easily switch between a development app.db database
(SQLite) and a production connection to a PostgreSQL server.
2) Testability: Multiple iterations of the app can be produced for unit
testing.
3) Modularity: It provides a clean way to initialize extensions like Flask-
SQLAlchemy and Flask-Login.
o Modularity (Blueprints): Flask Blueprints organized the application with
separate blueprints for auth.py (which handled /login and /register) and
main.py (handling core API routes). This helped keep the codebase clean and
maintainable, rather than a single giant routes.py file.
• Presentation Layer (Frontend):
o Framework: A standard React project was initialized via create-react-app.
o API Communication: A proxy was configured in the React package.json file. This
is a development-only feature that resolves the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
(CORS) errors by relaying API requests (e.g., /api/auth/login) from the React
server (localhost:3000) to the Flask backend server (localhost:5000). This was
tested and confirmed to work.
• Environment and Dependencies:
o A Python virtual environment (venv) was created to isolate the project's
dependencies.
o All of the python packages (Flask, Flask-SQLAlchemy, Flask-Login, Werkzeug,
Faker) were installed and pinned in a requirements.txt file for replicability.
3.2. Database Schema Implementation
The conceptual database schema (Report 0, page 6) was coded with Flask-SQLAlchemy (1).
This Relational Mapper (ORM) allows you to define your database tables as Python classes,
speeding up development and minimizing the potential for errors from raw SQL code.
The following five models were coded in app/models.py:
1. User Model: This model inherits from UserMixin for easy integration with Flask-
Login and stores all user-specific data.
o id: Primary key.
o username: A string, indexed and unique to log in.
o password_hash: A string to store a hashed password with 256 characters.
o income_level & risk_tolerance: Strings (e.g., 'low', 'medium', 'high') which are
primary features for the content-based (cold start) recommender.
2. ProductCatalog Model: This defines the "items" which can be recommended.
o id: Primary key.
o name: The name of the product (e.g., "Global Tech ETF").
o description: A text field to contain the official product details that is the primary
text knowledge source for the RAG system.
o category, interest_rate, etc. Other metadata to filter on.
3. Transaction Model: This is the "interact" table which ties users and products
together.
o id: Primary key.
o user_id: A foreign key linked to User.id.
o product_id: A foreign key linked to ProductCatalog.id.
o transaction_type, amount, and timestamp: Metadata about the interact.
The models provided and their relationships (e.to-many) are utilized to construct the user-
item interaction matrix. After they were defined, the flask db init, flask db migrate, and flask
db upgrade commands were executed to create the initial app.db (SQLite) file with the
correct schema.
3.3. Basic User Authentication Implementation
The core security layer has been implemented in full.
• Password Hashing: The User model now includes set_password(password) and
check_password(password) methods. The set_password method uses
Werkzeug.security.generate_password_hash in order to convert a plain-text
password into a securely-hashed password, including a salt to mitigate rainbow-
table attacks.
• Session Management: Flask-Login (12) has been initialized and configured. It
handles the entire user session lifecycle, starting with logging in the user (secure
session cookie created) and logging out the user (session company destroyed). A
user_loader callback has also been implemented allowing Flask-Login to pull the
current user object from the database using the session cookie.
• API Endpoints: Two API endpoints were developed in the auth blueprint, /register
and /login.
o /register accepts a JSON payload, verifies that the username is available,
generates a new User object, sets the password to a hashed version of the
received password, and then adds it to the database.
o /login accepts a JSON payload, identifies the user, and validates the provided
password using the function check_password(). If validation is successful, the
Flask-Login function login_user() is called to create the session.
3.4. Synthetic Dataset Generation
To fill the database, a script, seed_data.py, was created. This was a vital step in the process
because the effectiveness of the recommender system relies entirely on the quality of the
training data.
• Methodology: A logical and tiered approach to generation was employed.
1. Products: Step one was to create 50 ProductCatalog items and save them (for
example, "High-Yield Savings," "Student Loan," "Global Tech ETF").
2. Step two was to create 1,000 User profiles using Faker (10). Each user is
randomly assigned an income_level and risk_tolerance.
3. Step three was the most difficult. 1,000,000 transactions were generated. To
create plausible behavioral patterns for the ML model to find, logic was
employed statistically:
▪ Users classified as risk_tolerance='high' and income_level='high' had
10 times the likelihood of being aligned with "investment" or "ETF"
products.
▪ Users that were risk_tolerance='low' were mostly associated with
"savings" or "loan_payment" products.
▪ This creates a densely populated and notably non-random
relationship between user features and user interactions, which is a
necessity for the hybrid recommender to learn.
• Results: The app.db file has now been filled with a large, complex, realistic dataset,
completing this objective for the "Data Synthesis" task.
4. Preliminary Implementation
This section provides the concrete code artifacts and implementation details for the work
completed.
# app/models.py
# This is a simplified representation of the implemented models.
from . import db # db object from Application Factory
from flask_login import UserMixin
from werkzeug.security import generate_password_hash, check_password_hash
from datetime import datetime, timezone
class User(UserMixin, db.Model):
__tablename__ = 'user'
id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
username = db.Column(db.String(64), index=True, unique=True, nullable=False)
password_hash = db.Column(db.String(256), nullable=False)
# Content-based features for cold-start
income_level = db.Column(db.String(64), index=True)
risk_tolerance = db.Column(db.String(64), index=True)
# Relationship to transactions
transactions = db.relationship('Transaction', backref='owner', lazy='dynamic')
def set_password(self, password):
self.password_hash = generate_password_hash(password)
def check_password(self, password):
return check_password_hash(self.password_hash, password)
class ProductCatalog(db.Model):
__tablename__ = 'product_catalog'
id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
name = db.Column(db.String(128), index=True)
description = db.Column(db.Text)
category = db.Column(db.String(64), index=True)
interest_rate = db.Column(db.Float)
# Relationship to transactions
transactions = db.relationship('Transaction', backref='product', lazy='dynamic')
class Transaction(db.Model):
__tablename__ = 'transaction'
id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
amount = db.Column(db.Float)
transaction_type = db.Column(db.String(64), index=True)
timestamp = db.Column(db.DateTime, index=True, default=lambda:
datetime.now(timezone.utc))
# Foreign keys establishing the relationships
user_id = db.Column(db.Integer, db.ForeignKey('user.id'))
product_id = db.Column(db.Integer, db.ForeignKey('product_catalog.id'))
4.2. Implemented Authentication API (Code)
The following code from app/auth.py shows the functional endpoints for user registration
and login.
# app/auth.py
# This is a simplified representation of the authentication routes.
from flask import Blueprint, request, jsonify
from .models import User
from . import db
from flask_login import login_user, logout_user, current_user
auth_bp = Blueprint('auth', __name__, url_prefix='/api/auth')
@auth_bp.route('/register', methods=['POST'])
def register():
data = request.get_json()
if not data or not 'username' in data or not 'password' in data:
return jsonify({'error': 'Missing data'}), 400
if User.query.filter_by(username=data['username']).first():
return jsonify({'error': 'Username already exists'}), 400
new_user = User(
username=data['username'],
income_level=data.get('income_level', 'medium'),
risk_tolerance=data.get('risk_tolerance', 'medium')
)
new_user.set_password(data['password'])
db.session.add(new_user)
db.session.commit()
return jsonify({'message': 'User registered successfully'}), 201
@auth_bp.route('/login', methods=['POST'])
def login():
data = request.get_json()
if not data or not 'username' in data or not 'password' in data:
return jsonify({'error': 'Missing data'}), 400
user = User.query.filter_by(username=data['username']).first()
if user is None or not user.check_password(data['password']):
return jsonify({'error': 'Invalid username or password'}), 401
login_user(user, remember=True)
return jsonify({'message': 'Login successful'}), 200
@auth_bp.route('/logout', methods=['POST'])
def logout():
logout_user()
return jsonify({'message': 'Logout successful'}), 200
4.3. Challenges and Resolutions
There were no significant blockers identified, but there were a few scope-defining decisions
and minor Challenges.
• Challenges (Decision): Database Option (SQLite vs Production DB).
• Chosen Solution: SQLite was selected intentionally for this foundational stage of the
project (Weeks 1-2) because it has zero configuration to get started, operates as a
single file (app.db), and is optimal for fast prototyping and schema changes. Using
the Flask-SQLAlchemy ORM abstracts the database completely, meaning that the
application could be migrated to a production-grade database such as PostgreSQL
with a simple string change in the configuration file, without needing to touch the
Python model code at all.
• Challenge (Process): API Endpoint Testing.
• Chosen Solution: It is not possible to test the backend API routes from the browser
(which only allows GET requests) so the Postman app was used for all API testing. A
Postman "collection" was built specifically to test the authentication flow.
1. Then, a POST request was sent to /api/auth/register with a JSON body of
({"username": "testuser", "password": "123"}).
2. Confirmed a 201 Created response.
3. Then, a POST request was sent to /api/auth/login with the same credentials.
4. Confirmed the 200 OK response and the session cookie in the response headers.
5. Lastly, a POST request to /api/auth/login was sent with an invalid password.
6. Confirmed the 401 Unauthorized error response.
This confirmed that the entire authentication and hashing logic all work properly.
• Challenge (Implementation): Circular Imports with the Application Factory.
• Resolution: A common problem with the factory pattern is circular imports (e.g.,
app.py imports models.py, but models.py must import the db object from app.py).
This was resolved by instantiating the extensions (e.g., db = SQLAlchemy()) in a
separate extensions.py file which does not require an app. Then, in the create_app()
factory, you simply pass the app to db.init_app(app) to finalize the binding.
5. Next Steps
The project is on schedule. We have completed the "Foundation & Data" phase, so we are
now entering the "Model Building & Integration" phase (Weeks 3-6). Our planned tasks for
the next two-week reporting period will include:
1. Development of Recommender Module (Weeks 3-4):
• Data Preprocessing: Create a script that will read the Transaction data from the
SQLite database into a Pandas DataFrame.
• Pivot the Data: Organize the DataFrame into the user-item interaction matrix that
we will need.
• Model Training: Use Scikit-learn's TruncatedSVD (a variant of Matrix Factorization)
on the interaction matrix to create the latent factor models.
• Hybrid Logic: Develop the "cold start" logic. If the user has less than 5 transactions,
the recommender system will apply a content-based filter (such as matching
risk_tolerance to product.category). If the user has more than 5 transactions, it will
apply the SVD model.
2. Conversational Module (Chatbot MVP) (Week 5):
• Frontend: Build out the basic chatbot UI component in React. This will be a very
basic chat window with text input.
• State Management: The React component will manage the conversation state (the
list of messages) and make API calls to the backend.
3. LangChain Pipeline (RAG) (Week 6):
• Integrating LLM: Build out the backend RAG pipeline with the LangChain library.
• Retrieving: The pipeline will be set up to retrieve from the ProductCatalog table in
response to the question posed by the user.
• API Endpoint: A new endpoint for Flask API (e.g. /api/chat) will be created to accept
messages from the user in the React frontend and send them to the LangChain
pipeline.
4. Preliminary End-to-End Testing (Week 6):
• Conduct the initial end-to-end data flow test.
1. User logs in (React).
2. System generates recommendations (Flask + SVD).
3. User asks about a recommendation (React Chat).
4. System generates a RAG-based answer (Flask + LangChain).
6. References
This section includes academic and technical references for the core concepts and
technologies discussed and implemented.
1. Bayer, M. (2025). SQLAlchemy: The Python SQL toolkit and Object Relational
Mapper. Retrieved from https://www.sqlalchemy.org/
2. Burke, R. Hybrid Recommender Systems: Survey and Experiments. User Model
User-Adap Inter 12, 331–370 (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021240730564.
3. Koren, Y., Bell, R.M., & Volinsky, C. (2009). Matrix Factorization Techniques for
Recommender Systems. Computer, 42.
4. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., ... & Kiela, D.
(2020). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 9459-9474.
5. Linden, Greg & Smith, B. & York, J.. (2003). Linden G, Smith B and York J:
‘Amazon.com recommendations: item-to-item collaborative filtering’, Internet
Comput. IEEE, , 7. Internet Computing, IEEE. 7. 76 - 80.1109/MIC.2003.1167344.
6. Meta. (2025). React: The library for web and native user interfaces. Retrieved
from https://react.dev/
7. Pallets Projects. (2025). Flask: The Python micro framework for building web
applications. Retrieved from https://flask.palletsprojects.com/
8. Pallets Projects. (2025). Werkzeug: The comprehensive WSGI web application
library. Retrieved from https://werkzeug.palletsprojects.com/
9. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., ... &
Duchesnay, E. (2011). Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12(Oct), 2825-2830.
10. Tippmann, F. (2025). Faker: A Python package that generates fake data.
Retrieved from https://faker.readthedocs.io/
11. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., ... &
Polosukhin, I. (2IA). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 30.
12. Zelenin, M. (2025). Flask-Login: User session management for Flask. Retrieved
from https://flask-login.readthedocs.io/
--- END OF Report_1_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---


--- START OF Report_2_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---
Report 2: Project Progress
University/Department: California State University, Dominguez Hills
Course/Thesis/Project Title: CSC 599 Project
Semester/Year: Fall 2025
Project Title: A Hyper-Personalized Financial Product Engine Using
Generative AI
Student Name: Sumaiya Shaikh
Student ID: 213028116
Instructor / Committee Chair: Dr. Benyamin Ahmadnia
Date: 11-09-2025
1. Abstract / Summary of Progress
This report marks the completion of the "Foundation & Data" workstream (Weeks 1-2)
and details the critical analysis and design phase for the "Model Building &
Integration" workstream (Weeks 3-6) of the project. A supplementary literature review
was conducted to analyze existing solutions and identify key research gaps. This analysis
has validated the project's core objectives and provided a strong theoretical framework
for the features planned for Weeks 7-9, specifically "Smart Spending Analysis" and
"Proactive Alerts."
This document provides a detailed rationale for selecting the project's core machine
learning architecture: a Hybrid Recommender System [1] and a Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) Pipeline [2]. The "Work Completed" section (Section 3) details this
new analysis. The "Proposed System Architecture" section (Section 4) is significantly
expanded to describe the logical design, data flows, and evaluation strategies for these
models in sufficient detail. The project is on schedule and is now prepared to move from
this in-depth design phase to the implementation phase.
2. Introduction and Objectives (Recap)
This project seeks to address a key problem in the modern FinTech environment. In
this section we present a summary of the project’s problem, motivation, goals, and
key ideas as they relate to the problem area.
2.1. Problem Statement
The primary problem being certainly a breakdown in ability to not just communicate
but also fulfill matching individuals with highly relevant and contextual financial
products in a safe digital environment. The digitalization of banking has not clarified
choices; in fact, it has confused consumers and resulted in “decision paralysis” which
dramatically decreases engagement [4]. Current environments are fragmented and
contain a fundamental issue that exists:
• Prediction without Explanation: Traditional recommendation systems
claim to be proficient in predicting the product a user well like (i.e.,
collaborative filtering), but do not provide an explanation that is
personalized, relevant, and trustworthy in relation to the individual.
• Explanation without Context: In contrast, a modern “AI chatbot” may be
able to explain complex financial concepts, but lacks deep personalized
contextual detail. It is simply not aware of a user’s transaction history,
financial goals, nor their risk appetites as historical data, and
subsequently produces generic, impersonal advice.
As a result, there is low customer engagement, low financial literacy and a significant loss
of opportunity for both consumers as individuals and financial institutions.
2.2. Motivation and Scope
The project goals motivate the development of a single unified structure to fill the gap
of a "trustworthy financial assistant" that securely ingests and utilizes granular
financial data to give back to users. This system will merge prediction (the
Recommender System) with explanation (Generative AI) into one process that users
can access in a conversational manner.
• Scope: The scope of the project is to deliver a complete, end-to-end,
technical proof- of-concept. This proof-of-concept will involve a secure
user authentication and management system, a backend data architecture,
a working predictive recommender model, and a conversational
generative AI interface. The deliverable will be a web application, which
is a full stack application that demonstrates this functionality of
integration.
• Limitations: The recommender model will be trained only with the
synthetic financial transaction data generated for this project. The
generative AI will leverage the product catalog and user
recommendations but will not be producing real-time market advice or
executing trades.
2.3. Project Objectives
There are six primary objectives for the project established in Report 0:
1. System Design: Plan an end-to-end system topology for the web-
based system (Completed).
2. Data Synthesis and Analysis: Create a realistic synthetic dataset of
user financial behavior and products (Completed during this Period).
3. Model Building: Construct and train a machine-learning
recommender model to recommend products by matching user
profiles (Next Phase).
4. AI Application: Create an Generative AI model (RAG) to support
conversational explanations and financial planning applications
(Planned).
5. Interface Development: Toward building a complete fully functioning
full-stack web application for users interaction (Planned).
6. Evaluation: Evaluate the overall system performance by reviewing
model metrics, conversation quality, and systematic reviews (Planned).
3. Work Completed (Analysis & Design Phase)
Following the completion of the foundational work (Report 1), this reporting period
(Weeks 3-6) has focused on the critical analysis and design for the two core AI modules.
3.1. Research & Refinement of Project Scope (Detailed Analysis)
To ensure the project's features are high impact, a supplementary literature review was
conducted (via Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, and ACM Digital Library) to validate the
innovative potential of this project.
• Gap 1: Reactive vs. Proactive: The vast majority of current tools are reactive; they
show users where their money has gone. The academic literature shows a clear
and unmet need for proactive tools that can accurately forecast personal cash flow
and alert users before a financial event [3].
o Analysis: This finding is critical. It implies that simply showing a user a pie
chart of their spending (a common feature) has diminishing returns. The real
value is in shifting the user's perspective from past to future. This strongly
supports the "Proactive Alerts" feature, reframing it as the central value
proposition of the dashboard. Our ML model, therefore, must be a forecasting
model, not just a categorization one.
• Gap 2: The "Youth Chasm": A significant finding is the lack of effective digital
financial tools for users in the 14-20 age bracket. Research shows that financial
literacy interventions are most effective when targeted at adolescents, yet this
group is largely underserved by current FinTech products [4].
o Analysis: This gap presents both a market opportunity and a clear path to
demonstrating "hyper-personalization." A 16-year-old's financial "problem" is
not portfolio management; it's understanding compound interest and
managing allowance. Our system's "Life-Stage" feature will be more than a
cosmetic change; it will load a completely different, simpler set of rules and
goals for this demographic.
• Gap 3: Superficial Behavioral Nudges: Many apps use simple, generic "nudges"
(e.g., "You've spent $50 on coffee!"). Research in behavioral economics confirms
that for nudges to be effective, they must be timely, relevant, and personalized
[5].
o Analysis: The term "nudge" is often misused. A generic alert is just data. A
true nudge leverages "choice architecture" [5] to make a better decision easier.
Our analysis concludes that our RAG pipeline is the key to this. Instead of an
alert, the chatbot can proactively ask, "You're near a coffee shop where you've
spent $80 this month. Would you like to move $5 into your 'Vacation' goal
instead?" This is a specific, actionable, and timely intervention that our system
is uniquely designed to provide.
3.2. Analysis and Selection: Recommender Module
Based on the project goals and the nature of the synthetic dataset, a Hybrid
Recommender System [1] has been selected as the optimal approach. A detailed
architectural design is presented in Section 4.
• Reasoning: The system must be able to handle the "cold start" problem, where
new users have no transaction history. A single model (like Collaborative
Filtering) would fail for these users.
• Selected Solution: A hybrid model that combines a Content-Based Filter for
new users and a Collaborative Filtering (Matrix Factorization) model [6] for
established users.
3.3. Analysis and Selection: Generative AI (RAG) Pipeline
To solve the "Prediction without Explanation" problem, a Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) pipeline [2] has been designed.
• Reasoning: A standard Large Language Model (LLM) is not aware of the user's
private data, the product catalogue, or the recommender's reasoning. This makes it
unsafe for financial advice, as it can "hallucinate" (fabricate) information.
• Selected Solution: The RAG model solves this by grounding the LLM in facts.
When a user asks a question, the system first retrieves all relevant, factual data
and augments the LLM's prompt with this context. This ensures all explanations
are personalized, accurate, and safe.
4. Proposed System Architecture & Model Design (Detailed)
This section provides the detailed technical design for the implementation phase. (A
diagram, such as the one generated in Project_Architecture_Diagram.html, will be
inserted here as Figure 1).
4.1. Proposed Recommender Logic Flow (Detailed)
This section provides the detailed technical design for the implementation phase.
4.1.1. Data Preprocessing & Matrix Generation
1. Source Data: Transaction table (user_id, product_id, timestamp).
2. Task: Convert this "long" list of interactions into a "wide" user-item interaction
matrix.
3. Process:
• A Python script will pandas.read_sql() the Transaction table.
• We will aggregate interactions. For this prototype, we will use a binary
"interaction" (1 if the user has a product, 0 if not). A more advanced model
might use transaction frequency or amount as the value.
• The pandas.pivot_table() function will be used to create the final matrix:
M[user, item] = 1 or 0.
4. Sparsity: This matrix will be extremely sparse (mostly zeros), as users will only
have interacted with a tiny fraction of all available products. This is the primary
reason for our model selection.
4.1.2. Model 1: Content-Based Filter (Cold Start)
• Trigger: A user is considered "cold start" if they have < 5 non-zero entries in the
interaction matrix.
• Logic: This model will execute a direct query against the User and
ProductCatalog tables. It is a rules-based engine.
o Step 1: Fetch user's "content" features (e.g., user.risk_tolerance = 'low',
user.income_level = 'medium').
o Step 2: Define a business logic mapping. For example:
▪ If risk_tolerance == 'low', recommend product.category in
['high_yield_savings', 'cd', 'debt_payment_plan'].
▪ If risk_tolerance == 'high', recommend product.category in ['etf',
'index_fund', 'investment_loan'].
o Step 3: The system will return products that satisfy this filter, excluding any
the user already has.
This approach is simple, fast, and provides explainable (if basic) recommendations for
new users.
4.1.3. Model 2: Collaborative Filtering (Matrix Factorization)
• Trigger: User has >= 5 interactions.
• Technique: We will use Matrix Factorization (MF), specifically Truncated
SVD (Singular Value Decomposition) from the scikit-learn library [6].
• Why SVD?
o Traditional Collaborative Filtering (user-user, item-item) fails with
very sparse data.
o MF techniques, like SVD, are ideal for sparse matrices. They address
sparsity by decomposing the large user-item matrix M into two
smaller, "dense" latent factor matrices: U (user factors) and V (item
factors).
o U represents each user's "tastes" as a vector (e.g., [propensity for risk,
interest in long-term goals]).
o V represents each item's "properties" as a vector (e.g., [risk-level,
suitable-for-long-term]).
o By multiplying U and V back together, we get a full matrix M' of
predicted ratings, effectively filling in all the zeros.
• Implementation:
1. The sparse M matrix will be fed into the TruncatedSVD model for training
(this will be done "offline" for the prototype).
2. When a user u requests a recommendation, we take their vector U[u] and
predict their rating for all items.
3. We sort these predicted ratings and return the Top-N (e.g., Top 5) products
that the user has not already interacted with.
4.1.4. Model Evaluation Plan
• Offline Evaluation: Before deploying, we will split our synthetic data (80% train,
20% test). We will train the SVD model on the 80% and evaluate its ability to
"find" the hidden 20%.
• Metrics: We will use Precision@k and Recall@k (e.g., at k=5).
o Precision@5: Of the 5 products we recommended, how many were "correct"
(i.e., in the user's test set)?
o Recall@5: Of all the "correct" products in the test set, how many did we
successfully find in our top 5 recommendations?
• This evaluation is critical for the final report to prove the model's effectiveness.
4.2. Proposed RAG Pipeline Logic Flow (Detailed)
The RAG pipeline [2] will be the core of the /api/chat endpoint.
4.2.1. The "Retrieve" Step
1. User Question: "Why did you recommend this Tech ETF?"
2. Intent & Entity Recognition: The system must first identify the "entities" in the
question: user_id = current_user.id and product_name = 'Tech ETF'.
3. Parallel Context Retrieval: The system will fetch three sources of context:
o Context 1 (User): db.session.query(User).get(user_id) -> Fetches profile (e.g.,
risk_tolerance: 'high').
o Context 2 (Product): db.session.query(ProductCatalog).filter_by(name='Tech
ETF').first() -> Fetches description (e.g., 'This ETF tracks the NASDAQ...').
o Context 3 (Recommendation): recommender_service.get_reason(user_id,
product_id) -> Fetches the reason for the recommendation (e.g., reason: 'High
SVD match score (0.92)').
4.2.2. The "Augment" Step (Prompt Engineering)
• This is the most critical step for safety. We will assemble a "mega-prompt" using
a specific template.
• System Prompt: "You are a helpful financial assistant for 'FinPersonalize'. You
must answer the user's question using only the context provided below. Do not
use any outside knowledge. Do not fabricate information. Be friendly and concise.
If the context is not sufficient to answer, say 'I do not have enough information to
answer that.'"
• Context Block:
--- CONTEXT START ---
[User Profile: Risk Tolerance is 'high', Stated Goals are 'long-term growth']
[Product Information: 'Tech ETF' is a 'high-risk' product that tracks the
NASDAQ-100 index.]
[Recommendation Reason: 'High SVD match score (0.92)']
--- CONTEXT END ---
• User Question: "Why this Tech ETF?"
4.2.3. The "Generate" Step (Safety & PII)
• PII Scrubbing: Before the prompt is sent to the external LLM API (e.g., Hugging
Face), a scrubber will remove PII. For example, user.name or user.email will
never be placed in the context.
• API Call: The final, safe prompt is sent to the LLM.
• LLM Generates: The LLM, bound by the prompt, generates a safe, grounded
answer: "Based on your 'high' risk tolerance and 'long-term growth' goals, we
recommended the 'Tech ETF' because it is a 'high-risk' product that had a high
match score (0.92) with your financial activities."
4.2.4. Futureproofing (Note for Report)
• For this prototype, retrieving from the SQL database is sufficient.
• For a Future work the system with thousands of products, this would be slow. The
"Retrieve" step would be replaced with a Vector Database. The ProductCatalog
descriptions would be converted into vector embeddings and stored. The user's
question ("Why this ETF?") would also be "vectorized," and the system would
perform a high-speed similarity search to find the most relevant context, which is
a more scalable approach.
5. Next Steps
The project is on track. The next steps are focused on the implementation of these
designs, aligning with Weeks 7-9.
o Weeks 7-9 (November):
o Task 1: Implement Recommender Service
▪ reco_data.py: Script to generate and save the user-item matrix.
▪ reco_model.py: Train and pickle (save) the TruncatedSVD model.
▪ reco_service.py: Create the RecommenderService class in Flask.
▪ routes.py: Add /api/recommend endpoint that calls the service.
o Task 2: Implement RAG Pipeline
▪ chat_service.py: Build the RAG service class.
▪ Implement context retrieval (User, Product, Reason).
▪ Implement prompt-engineering template.
▪ Implement PII scrubbing logic.
▪ routes.py: Add /api/chat endpoint that calls the service.
o Task 3: Implement Financial Planning Features (MVP)
▪ Backend: Create logic for Smart spending/savings analysis (e.g., simple time-
series forecast based on past 30 days).
▪ Backend: Create DB models and API endpoints for a simple Goals feature
(e.g., POST /api/goals).
▪ Frontend: Build the React components to display the forecast and the goal-
tracking UI.
o Task 4: Implement Proactive Alerts
▪ Backend: Create a simple module (e.g., SubscriptionReviewer) that scans
transactions for recurring payments and returns them to the UI.
o Task 5: Documentation
▪ Begin drafting final project documentation and presentation slides.
• Week 10 (Late Nov - Early Dec):
▪ Final end-to-end system integration and debugging.
▪ Prepare demo video/screenshots.
▪ Finalize presentation and rehearse.
5. References
1) R. Burke, "Hybrid Recommender Systems: Survey and Experiments," User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 12, pp. 331–370, 2002.
2) P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, et al., "Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks," Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33 (NeurIPS 2020), pp. 9459-9474, 2020.
3) A. S. Sethi, S. Arora, and N. P. Singh, "Machine learning based personal cash
flow forecasting," 2021 International Conference on Computing, Communication,
and Intelligent Systems (ICCCIS), 2021, pp. 312-316.
4) D. Fernandes, J. G. Lynch Jr., and R. G. Netemeyer, "Financial literacy, financial
education, and downstream financial behaviors," Management Science, vol. 60,
no. 8, pp. 1861-1883, 2014.
5) E. J. Johnson, S. B. Shu, B. G. C. Dellaert, et al., "Beyond nudges: Tools of a
choice architecture," Marketing Letters, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 487-504, 2012.
6) Y. Koren, R. Bell, and C. Volinsky, "Matrix Factorization Techniques for
Recommender Systems," Computer, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 30-37, 2009.
--- END OF Report_2_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---


--- START OF Report_3_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---
Report 2: Project Progress
University/Department: California State University, Dominguez Hills
Course/Thesis/Project Title: CSC 599 Project
Semester/Year: Fall 2025
Project Title: A Hyper-Personalized Financial Product Engine Using
Generative AI
Student Name: Sumaiya Shaikh
Student ID: 213028116
Instructor / Committee Chair: Dr. Benyamin Ahmadnia
Date: 11-24-2025
1. Abstract / Summary of Progress
This report serves as the third formal progress report for the Hyper-Personalized
Financial Product capstone project, summarizing the progress made during the
Implementation and Integration phase (Weeks 7 through 9). After completing the
Analysis and Design phase, detailed fully in Report 2, the project proceeded from
theoretical modelling and architectural design to actual software development and system
integration. The main goal of this reporting period was to implement the proposed Hybrid
Recommender System architecture and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline
[2] into a working, deployable, and auditable codebase.
Key accomplishments during this period include the full framework and deployment of
the Flask-based backend API, the successful generation and complex transformation of
the synthetic transaction dataset into a sparse user-item interaction matrix, and the first
training and serialization of the Truncated SVD (singular value decomposition) model. In
addition, there is now a functioning "Financial Assistant" chatbot module, which features
a novel retrieval system that takes user risk profiles, historical transaction data, and
product metadata into account before asking the Large Language Model (LLM) for a
response.[2]
Importantly, given the inherent risks created by generative AI in finance, I plan to launch
the LLM Audit Framework. This safety-critical layer will be designed to rigorously test
the system's hallucinations [7], factual errors, and Personally Identifiable Information
(PII) leakage. This report contains a detailed description of those technical
implementations, describes the algorithmic challenges associated with data sparsity and
"cold-start" user cohorts,[4] and provides a detailed testing roadmap for completing the
validation work. The system is currently stable and operating as expected, meaning that
latency is within projections, and the system is on track for the last end-to-end integration
tests in week 10.
2. Introduction and Objectives (Recap)
This project seeks to address a key problem in the modern FinTech environment. In
this section I present a summary of the project’s problem, motivation, goals, and key
ideas as they relate to the problem area.
2.1. Problem Statement
The current state of consumer financial services is one of extraordinary fragmentation
and concurrent loss of clarity for the customer. Though the digitization of banking has
led to greater democratization of financial products, zero commission trading apps, or
high-yield savings accounts, this is adding to the cognitive load facing the average
consumer. Users have never had so much data at their fingertips, but they still endure a
dearth of practical knowledge; they can pour over their transaction history to the
penny, but do not have insight into the information they need to effectively manage
their long-term financial position.
From our deep dive into the current FinTech ecosystem, I have identified three major
systemic failures that Hyper-personalised app aims to solve:
1. The Overwhelming Number of Reactive Tools: The majority of the current
banking tools are simply reactive in design. They do many of the descriptive
analytics very well (e.g., "You spent $50 on coffee last month") but lack any
prescriptive or proactive analytic advice. They share notifications with the
client only when they have exceeded the budget or paid a fee. Because of this,
users exist in a feedback loop of damage control rather than sustainable wealth
management. [3]
2. The "Youth Chasm" in Financial Inclusion: There is a significant amount of
evidence that an absence of targeted and efficient digital tools exists for
financial inclusion in the age group of 14-20. Academic research finds that
financial literacy interventions are best targeted at young people (the
"formative financial years"), but this population is unlikely to be reached by
traditional fintech products - all of which assume some level of credit history,
income stability, or asset base that this population does not have. This creates a
"cold start" problem where the users who theoretically need the most guidance
are the very users that the algorithms are least prepared to help. [4]
3. The "Trust Gap" in Generative AI: While "AI Chatbots" have crawled into
almost every customer service experience, they struggle deeply with context. A
generic LLM (Large Language Model) [9] does not have access to a user's
private transaction history, risk tolerance, or financial goals. As such, the
advice is often either dangerously generic (e.g., "Save more money") or, even
worse, factually hallucinated (e.g., generating fictitious interest rates or
products). The more detached the advisory gap appears to the user, the wider
the "Trust Gap" grows in the user's ability to rely on AI for collectively serious
financial engagements.
2.2. Motivation and Scope
This project is intended to address these identified gaps by creating a singular,
integrated "Trustworthy Financial Assistant." The primary aim of the project is to
bring together the predictive power of Recommender Systems with the explanatory
and conversational capabilities of Generative AI to build a system that predicts what a
user should do, but also explains what the user should do in simple terms, based on
the user's actual context.
Scope: The project scope is to demonstrate the viability of a complete, end-to-end
technical proof-of-concept (POC). This includes a secure user authentication
mechanism, a comprehensive backend data architecture to facilitate relational
transaction data and a secure conversational interface to support interaction with the
user (e.g., text/chat).
Limitations & Boundaries: In establishing the boundaries of the project, the system
must simulate financial advice using synthetic (randomly generated, high-fidelity)
data. In the case that vendor partnerships will be used in the POC to associate real
users with the POC, the system will not execute trades against the open market in real
time, will not move real funds or connect with real banking networks (e.g., Plaid or
Yodlee). The simulation aspects of the POC will keep the project safe from exposing
user assets and funds to a live, real-time platform, creating a sandbox arena to test
advanced AI architecture.
2.3. Project Objectives
As outlined in the project charter and enhanced during the Design Phase (Report 2), the six
primary objectives that are steering this implementation are:
1) System Design (Complete): To design a scalable, modular end to end topology for a
web-based financial platform with careful consideration of concerns between the data
layer, the inference layer and the presentation layer.
2) Data Synthesis (Complete): To create a realistic statistically diverse synthetic dataset
mimicking user financial behaviors at different demographics during the experience
(students, young professionals, retirees).
3) Model Building (In Progress): To build and train a Hybrid Recommender System that
accommodates sparse data situations using Matrix Factorization [6], but also situations
considering new users in Rule-Based Content Filtering.
4) AI Application (In Progress): To create a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
pipeline [2] that consistently grounds LLM responses in factual user data, specifically
isolating hallucinations.
5) Interface Development (In Progress): To create a responsive intuitive full stack web
application (React.js) that facilitates user interaction and visualizes complex financial
data at different levels of abstraction.
6) Evaluation (Planned): To evaluate the system rigorously and a dual metric approach:
quantitative metrics for the recommender (Precision, Recall) [1] and qualitative audit
logs the LLM (Hallucination Rate, PII Scrubbing Success Rate).
3. Work Completed (Analysis & Design Phase)
Before I outline the code implementations that took place over the reporting period, it is
important to recap the key design considerations and preliminary work completed in the
previous stage of the project (Report 2). These considerations will effectively serve as the
architectural framework upon which the current software is being constructed.
3.1. Research & Refinement of Project Scope (Detailed Analysis)
After the initial foundation work, I followed up with an additional literature review to
confirm that the project's technical approach was consistent with current scholarship. Our
review supported the need to take a Hybrid Approach for the results generation engine. In
the literature [4], it is evident that pure Collaborative Filtering (CF) fails for new users
due to the "Cold Start" problem because there is no prior interaction history for the new
user to relate to other users. Similarly, pure Content-Based Filtering (CBF) frequently
leads to the "filter bubble", whereby established users fail to discover serendipitous
connections [8]. This literature directly informed our thinking around the use of dual-path
logic flow: a deterministic rule-based path for the "Youth" demographic (solving the cold
start), and a probabilistic matrix factorization path for established users (solving for
discovery).
3.2. Data Preprocessing & Matrix Generation
A considerable amount of work leading to this stage was focused on preparing the data to
be served to the machine learning models. The raw transactional data, stored in a
relational Transaction table (Schema: user_id, product_id, timestamp, amount,
merchant_category), were not amenable to direct processing in the collaborative filtering
algorithms.
Transformation Logic:
I developed a robust Extraction, Transformation, and Loading (ETL) pipeline using the
Python pandas library. The main transformation was from a "long" list of transactional
records into a "wide" User-Item interaction matrix.
• Aggregation: Interaction aggregation was accomplished utilizing the
pandas.pivot_table(). I defined "interaction" as either a purchase or a significant
interaction (e.g., holding an asset, ongoing subscription).
• Sparse Handling: The resultant matrix, $M$, is extremely sparse. In a catalogue
of 100 products and 10,000 users, each user has interacted with less than 5
products and as such, this means the matrix is > 99% empty (zeros). This was the
primary driver for selecting Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) as a
collaborative filtering algorithm. SVD[6] is a mathematical advanced method
which is normalizable by construction, compared to neighbor-based methods (k-
Nearest Neighbours), which reduces the dimensionality of the matrix unto a dense
matrix of latent factors.
3.3. Algorithm Selection: The Hybrid Model Architecture
The design process has concluded with a final adoption of the Hybrid Recommender
System architecture, which I have now turned to implementation.
• Component A: Content-Based Filter (The "Cold Start" Solver): For users who
have less than 5 interactions, the system consists of a deterministic rule-based
engine that maps the explicit user attributes (e.g., "Risk Tolerance: Low", "Goal:
Emergency Fund") to product categories (e.g., "High Yield Savings"). This
process ensures that a 19-year-old student with little credit history still receives
useful recommendations.
• Component B: Matrix Factorization (The "Discovery" Engine): For established
users, I use Truncated SVD, available in the scikit-learn library [5]. Truncated
SVD decomposes the User-Item matrix ($M$) into two lower-dimensional
matrices ($U$ and $V$) that represent latent factors that represent users' hidden
preferences (e.g., latent preference for "tech-heavy" portfolios, or "ESG-
compliant" funds).
4. Proposed System Architecture & Model Design (Detailed)
This part is the body of Report 3, where I discuss the specific technical implementation
work carried out in Weeks 7 through 9. I will discuss the software stack in layers,
providing specific descriptions of the logic, libraries, and architecture incorporated into
the various layers of the application.
4.1.Proposed Recommender Logic Flow (Detailed)
The backend application logic has been developed using Flask, a light and extensible web
framework built on Python. I opted for Flask as it is lighter than alternative frameworks
(e.g. Django), while remaining extensible and allowing comprehensive integration into
the Python ecosystem of data science-related libraries (pandas, NumPy, scikit-learn). The
architecture is based on a modified version of the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern,
with the View decoupled as a React frontend.
• API Design (RESTful Architecture): I have successfully built and developed the
main RESTful API endpoints that function as the communication layer between
the front-end and the data models.
o (api/auth/login): This endpoint handles the authentication of the user. The
frontend authenticates the legitimate user's credentials against the database
and returns a JSON Web Token (JWT). The returned token must be included
within the request headers of all subsequent requests, allowing for a stateless
and secure session management.
o (api/recommend): This endpoint accepts a user_id in the request and returns a
JSON list of recommended products. The logic consists of hybrid logic,
responding to the request and deciding dynamically whether the request
should be routed to the SVD model or Cold-Start engine.
o (api/chat): This endpoint requires a message string and returns the RAG-
generated message as a response. It also orchestrates the complex logic in
retrieving context, constructing the prompt, and making the call to the external
LLM APIs.
• Database Integration: For the prototype stage, I are using SQLite and will benefit
from portability and deployment ease. Nevertheless, the application interacts with
the database through SQLAlchemy, a powerful Object-Relational Mapper
(ORM). This abstraction layer allows us to swap in a production-grade database
(like PostgresSQL) without needing to change a single line of your application
code. The database schema has been finalized and populated with over 10,000 synthetic
transaction records to simulate a realistic live environment.
4.2. Implementation of the Hybrid Recommender System
(reco_service.py)
At the core of the proactive guidance system is a recommendation logic contained in the
reco_service.py module. This module implements the "Switching" logic that I had
decided on in the design phase.
4.2.1. The Switching Logic Implementation
The system decides dynamically at runtime what algorithm to use based on the depth of
the user's history. This also solves the "Cold Start" problem, as an empty value will not
be returned from the system [4].
# Conceptual logic flow implemented in reco_service.py
def get_recommendations(user_id):
interaction_count = db.session.query(Transaction).filter_by(user_id=user_id).count()
# Threshold set to 5 based on analysis of "Youth Chasm" needs
if interaction_count < 5:
# Route to Rule-Based Engine
user_profile = db.session.query(User).get(user_id)
return run_content_based_filter(user_profile)
else:
# Route to ML Engine
return run_svd_collaborative_filter(user_id)
This simple, yet effective, conditional logic ensures new users (the desired "Youth"
demographic) will receive appropriate recommendations based on their express goals
from the start, instead of waiting weeks for the new user to create a transaction history.
4.2.2. The SVD Model Pipeline
For the collaborative filtering side, I created an offline training pipeline in
reco_model.py.
1. Ingestion & Pivot: The script queries the database and ingests the transactions into
a pandas DataFrame, and pivot it to create the sparse matrix.
2. Dimensionality Reduction: I create the TruncatedSVD(n_components=20) model
from scikit-learn[5]. The initial value of 20 components was taken empirically.
Although I could have created more components, 20 gives us enough granularity
to get unique tastes from users (e.g., "Risk Averse", "Crypto Enthusiast"), but not
so much that I over-fit a model to noise.
3. Serialization: The model components (the $U$ and $V$ matrices) are serialized
using Python's pickle package and stored in a file on disk. The live web service
loads the pickled files into RAM on startup and performs inference below one
second during a user request.
4.3. Implementation of the RAG Pipeline (chat_service.py)
The RAG pipeline was the most complex and innovative module completed during this
period that drives the conversation interface. This pipeline solves the problem of
"Hallucination" that is uniquely part of standard LLMs.
4.3.1. The “Retrieve” Step (Context-Aware Fetching)
The LLM hallucinated because it did not have access to private, real-time data. I solved
this by adding a Parallel Context Retrieval step. When a query comes in (e.g. “What did
you recommend this ETF?”), the query will not be sent to the LLM as is, but instead, it
will perform 3 parallel database lookups in order to build a Context Block:
1. User Context: Retrieves the user's risk tolerance (High), income category ($50k),
and described financial goals (Retirement) in the User table.
2. Product Context: If the user mentions a specific product (ex. “Tech ETF”), it will
retrieve the product’s volatility index, its expense ratio, and description from the
ProductCatalog.
3. Reasoning Context: The system calls the reco_service to understand why a
product was recommended (e.g., "Match Score: 0.92").
4.3.2. The "Augment" Step (Prompt Engineering)
Here, I have implemented a strict "Mega-Prompt" template to bind the behavior of the
LLM. I also utilize prompt delimiters to clearly delineate the system instructions from
context data injected by us.
Template implementation:
"You are a helpful, conservative, financial assistant for ‘Fin AI’.
You have to answer the user's question using only the context below.
Do not make anything up.
If you do not find the information in the context, say 'I do not have enough information.'
--- CONTEXT START ---
[User Profile Data injected here]
[Product Metadata injected here]
[Recommendation Logic injected here]
--- CONTEXT END ---
User Question: {user_query}"
This strict templating is our primary mechanism to maintain safety. By explicitly telling
the model to rely strictly on the context, I significantly reduce the chance that it will
make up financial products or misrepresent the user's situation[7].
4.3.3. The "Generate" Step & PII Scrubbing
Before sending the final prompt to the external LLM provider, it goes through a PII
Scrubber. I built this as a middleware function using Python's re (Regular Expression)
library. It scans the input string entered by the user to identify patterns indicating[7]:
• Email addresses (\b[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Z|a-z]{2,}\b)
• Phone numbers
• Social Security or Account ID patterns
All matches will be replaced by tokens [REDACTED] so that even if a user types private
data into the chat window by mistake, that data does not leave our secure server
environment to be processed by a third-party AI provider.
4.4. Frontend Interface Development
The UI is being developed with React.js by using a component architecture and
considering maintainability as a design motivation.
• For our global state management purposes, I use React Hooks (useState,
useEffect) and React Context API to manage state for the authentication of the
user and recommended products.
• The dashboard component is built around a card layout to display
recommended products. Each card displays the product name, a "Suitability
Score" derived from the SVD prediction, and a "Why?" button that might
allow for more detailed information for the user.
• The chat interface will ultimately manage the asynchronous interactions with
the LLM generation. I used optimistic UI updates to promote showing the
user's message immediately, and added a 'typing...' loading state, for a smooth
user experience while waiting for the queue to process the RAG pipeline,
which can take 2-3 seconds.
5. Challenges and Solutions
The execution stage has not been without considerable technical difficulties. In this sub-
section, I briefly summarize some notable challenges experienced and corresponding
engineering solutions.
5.1. Data Sparsity & "Zero Divisions" Errors
• Challenge: During the initial training of the SVD Model, I experienced runtime
errors that related to the very sparse nature of the synthetic data[6]. Although
realistic, many products in the tail end of the catalogue had zero interaction from
the entire user base. Therefore, while constructing the matrix, I had columns of
zeros which caused mathematical instability (or singularities) when I tried to
decompose it.
• Solution: I introduced a robust data cleaning step in the ETL pipeline. Prior to
generating the matrix, I filter the interaction data to remove any product with
fewer than 3 total interactions. This "prune" operates to stabilize the SVD
algorithm without significantly eliminating any portion of the catalogue, ensuring
that the model is only learning from statistically significant patterns.
5.2. Cold Start Logic Overlaps and Conflicts
• The Problem: The first engine based on rules was far too general. For example, a
"High Risk" user classification was mapping to a "Crypto Assets" category as
well as "High-Yield Savings Accounts." While diversification is a good thing, the
engine was providing these recommendations as equal weights within its
"financial planning recommendations," which confused the Assistant when
explaining the rationale of the categorisation.
• The Solution: The business logic mapping was refined to be mutually exclusive
and hierarchical. A "primary goal" was introduced (i.e., "Growth" vs. "Safety") to
differentiate the recommendations. Now, a "High Risk" user with a "Growth"
primary goal gets a Crypto/Stocks classification, while a "High Risk" user with a
"Safety" primary goal gets an Index/Bond classification. This creates a cleaner
narrative for the RAG pipeline to explain.
5.3. LLM Latency and Experience of the User
• The Problem: The process to establish the RAG pipeline combined three
database queries, a PII scrubbing pass and an external API call. From the start,
this involved multiple processing workflows which consistently produced
response times on the order to 5 seconds + - which was experienced by users
as too slow.
• The Solution: I adopted asynchronous processing of the database queries,
when possible (using Python's asyncio capabilities) in the code. I also
optimized the SQL indexing on the Transaction table. I also optimized the
frontend components of the application to render it's chat message stream (as
it came) [assuming the API supports this] and/or provided a "fun" loading
animation to better prepare (manage) users expectations.
6. Next Steps and Timeline
Having achieved most of the core implementation, the project now pivots into the
final Validation, Audit and Documentation phase. The focus now shifts from
"building" to "breaking", or more simply, rigorously testing the system to ensure
it is safe to put into production.
Upcoming Milestones (Weeks 10-12):
1. System Integration (week 10): The first priority will be final end-to-end
integration. The "Proactive Alert" module (which exists as an independent
Python script that scans for recurring subscriptions) will be integrated into the
primary dashboard, completing the feature set of the system. I will ultimately
be able to alert users to financial events before they happen.
2. The LLM Audit (week 11): This is the most important safety milestone. I will
run a batch of 100 "Red Team" adversarial queries intended to trick the
chatbot into providing "bad advice" (e.g., "How do I launder money?", "What
will the price of Apple stock be tomorrow?"). I will track:
o Hallucination Rate: The percentage of responses that contained
hallucinated facts.
o Refusal Rate: The percentage of questions answered with a refusal (i.e.,
the model declined to answer in-scope or dangerous questions).
3. Performance Assessments (Week 11): I will evaluate the final Precision and
Recall metrics for the recommender system by using the 20% hold-out test set
outlined in the Design Phase. This will give quantitative evidence of the
models effectiveness.
4. Final Reporting (Week 12):The Team will compile the final dissertation
(target length 40-50 pages). This will include full code in appendices, user
manuals, the final "Sign-Off" audit report, and the demo video for the working
application.
7. References
1) Gunawardana, A., & Shani, G. (2009). A Survey of Accuracy Evaluation Metrics
of Recommendation Tasks. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10, 2935-
2962.
2) Lewis, P., et al. (2020). Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-
Intensive NLP Tasks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
3) Heo, S., Lee, J., & Kim, K. (2023). Understanding User Needs for Financial
Chatbots. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
4) Ricci, F., Rokach, L., & Shapira, B. (2022). Recommender Systems Handbook.
Springer US.
5) Scikit-learn Developers. (2024). TruncatedSVD User Guide. Scikit-learn
Documentation. Available: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.decomposition.TruncatedSVD.html.
6) Koren, Y., Bell, R., & Volinsky, C. (2009). Matrix Factorization Techniques for
Recommender Systems. IEEE Computer, 42(8), 30-37.
7) European Data Protection Supervisor. (2024). GDPR and AI: Privacy Concerns in
Large Language Models. EU Publications.
8) Zhang, Y., et al. (2019). Deep Learning based Recommender System: A Survey
and New Perspectives. ACM Computing Surveys, 52(1).
9) Vaswani, A., et al. (2017). Attention Is All You Need. In Proceedings of the 31st
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS).
--- END OF Report_3_Project_Progress_Sumaiya.pdf ---
